Interaction with 3D objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 3D web client supports rich model interaction such as highlighting
of 3D objects on mouse over and mouse click. More than one 3D object can
be selected by Ctrl-clicking on them and can also be hidden and
redisplayed in the 3D web client interactively. Besides, the user is
able to create a screenshot image of the current map view (including the
highlighted and hidden 3D objects) or print it directly via the web
browser. Moreover, when a 3D object is selected, it can be visually
inspected in other third-party mapping applications (*Bing Maps, Google
Streetview, OpenStreetMap* and *DualMaps*) from multiple view
perspectives such as oblique view, street view, or a combined version.

For the sake of clarity, the above mentioned functionalities will be
illustrated with the help of a number of screenshots generated based on
the online demo **Semantic 3D City Model of Berlin** which shows all
Berlin’s buildings (> 550,000) with textured 3D geometries and many
thematic attributes in the 3D web client. You can find the link of this
demo via the following web page:

https://github.com/3dcitydb/3dcitydb-web-map

Once the demo was opened in your web browser, you may need to use the
*Geocoder* widget to zoom the Earth map to the building object with the
GMLID “\ **BLDG_0003000b0009a940**\ ”.

|image208|

Figure 171: By clicking on a building object it will automatically be
highlighted and its attribute information will be queried from a Google
Fusion Table and displayed in tabular form on the right side of the 3D
web client

|image209|

Figure 172: By clicking on the dropdown list *Show the selected object
in External Maps*, the user can select one of the given options to
explore the selected building object in the chosen mapping application
which will be opened in a new browser window or tab

|image210|

Figure 173: If the option *DualMaps* has been chosen, the selected
building will be shown in a so-called mash-up web application linking
different view perspectives, e.g. Google 2D map view, Google Streetview,
and Bing Maps oblique view

|image211|

Figure 174: A group of building objects can be interactively selected by
Ctrl-clicking. Deactivating the selection of a certain building object
can be done by Ctrl-clicking on it again

|image212|

Figure 175: The selected building objects can be hidden by clicking on
the button *Hide selected Objects.* The GMLIDs of the selected
(highlighted) and hidden building objects can be explored by clicking
the drop-down buttons *Choose highlighted Object* and *Choose hidden
Object* respectively

|image213|

Figure 176: The hidden objects can be shown on the 3D web client again
by clicking on the button *Show Hidden Objects*

|image214|

Figure 177: The objects selection and along with the highlighting effect
can be deactivated by clicking on the button *Clear Highlighting*

|image215|

Figure 178: A screenshot of the current view can be created directly
within the 3D web client by clicking on the button *Create Screenshot*
or *Print current view*

|image216|

Figure 179: Once the button *Print current view* has been clicked on, a
printer settings dialog (differs for different web browsers) will appear
giving a preview of the screenshot file to be printed

|image217|

Figure 180: Shadow visualization of the 3D city models can also be
activated and deactivated by clicking the *Toggle Shadows* button

|image218|

Figure 181: It is possible to create a scene link saving the current
status of the 3D web client by clicking on the *Generate Scene Link*
button. This scene link encodes the information about the title of the
web site, activation status of the shadow visualization, parameters of
the current loaded layers, the camera perspective etc. The created scene
link can be stored as a browser bookmark or favorite and can also be
sent e.g. by email to friends, colleagues, project partners etc. When
they open the link, the same scene will open in their browsers.

.. |image208| image:: media/image218.PNG
   :width: 6.29683in
   :height: 4.6562in

.. |image209| image:: media/image219.PNG
   :width: 6.30338in
   :height: 4.04884in

.. |image210| image:: media/image220.png
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.16181in

.. |image211| image:: media/image221.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.19333in

.. |image212| image:: media/image222.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.2in

.. |image213| image:: media/image223.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.20667in

.. |image214| image:: media/image224.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.20667in

.. |image215| image:: media/image225.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.19333in

.. |image216| image:: media/image226.png
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 4.42361in

.. |image217| image:: media/image227.PNG
   :width: 6.29834in
   :height: 4.20556in

.. |image218| image:: media/image228.PNG
   :width: 6.3in
   :height: 3.7in
