Acknowledgements
================

The 3D City Database project team is grateful and appreciative for the
financial assistance and support we received from partners that
contributed to the development of version 4 and the work on the ADE
support.

**Government Technology Agency of Singapore**

The Government Technology Agency of Singapore (GovTech Singapore) has
been developing a 3D city standard for Singapore based on CityGML, to
establish a common 3D representation of the city-state. GovTech wanted
to extend the representation to include other city features through the
ADE approach, and had worked with virtualcitySYSTEMS GmbH to start the
development of the ADE support on 3DCityDB. The intent is to open source
the 3DCityDB ADE support to the international community, so as to
encourage wider adoption and implementation of the CityGML standard and
ADEs.

**CADFEM International GmbH**

Founded in 1985, CADFEM is one of the pioneers of numerical simulation
based on the Finite Element Method and one of the largest European
suppliers of Computer-Aided Engineering. Through the Leonard Obermeyer
Center of the Technical University Munich, CADFEM supports the research
on digital methods for the design, creation and maintenance of the built
environment and the work on the 3D City Database. Bridging the gap
between simulation systems and 3D GIS / BIM is a key requirement for
enabling multi-physics Urban Simulations and for building Digital Twins
of the urban space. The CityGML ADE mechanism supports this in two ways:
1) city features can be enriched with data that is relevant for
simulations, and 2) simulation results can be brought back into the city
model, turning it into a dynamic knowledge base. CADFEM is supporting
the 3D City Database project to leverage the adoption and usage of
CityGML ADEs in the field of Urban Simulations.

**Climate-KIC of the EIT**

Climate-KIC is a so-called ‘Knowledge and Innovation Community’ about
Climate Change and Mitigation. It is one of three Knowledge and
Innovation Communities (KICs) created in 2010 by the European Institute
of Innovation and Technology (EIT). The EIT is an EU body whose mission
is to create sustainable growth. Most 3DCityDB developments at TU Munich
were done in the context of the projects Energy Atlas Berlin, Modeling
City Systems (MCS), Smart Sustainable Districts (SSD), and Smart
District Data Infrastructure (SDDI), all financially supported by
Climate-KIC.
